1.	Definition of a cyberattack

1.1.	Definition, targets, interests and consequences
The term cyberattack has multiple definitions which may differ on certain points. We will here give a single definition with which we will stick throughout this report and develop around it. A cyberattack here designates *an "attempt to expose, alter, disable, destroy, steal or gain unauthorized access to or make unauthorized use of an asset".*
Cyberattacks *can be conducted by a wide variety of attackers*. These attackers can range from single individuals to entire organisations [1].  While single individuals will tend to conduct such attacks to gain money or to uncover some data, wider organisations can have other interests. As cybersecurity became a mandatory domain, nearly all governments created a cybersecurity division, and some even created specialized groups to conduct cyberattacks on foreign countries or organisations. The motivations of such groups can be economical, political or even military. While reasons differ, cyberattacks can target everyone : individuals, administrations, NGOs, companies, ranging from small start-up to multinationals.
*All types of computer systems are exposed to cyberattacks*, including servers, websites, networks, operating systems, routers, switches, etc. Each cyberattack exploits a certain type of flaw within the targeted computer system. As an example, malicious software can only be executed to gain access to the target on a system lacking antivirus software and proper access permissions. But it should also be reminded that successful cyberattacks, while taking advantage of machine flaws, usually involve inappropriate human behavior at a certain stage of the attack (Before : poor permissions, badly-configured firewall, etc. ; During : clicking on an unknown link sent by an unknown source, executing suspicious pieces of software, not alerting competent authorities, etc. ; After : still not contacting competent authorities, obeying the attackers' instructions, etc.). Such vulnerabilities have rendered cybersecurity measures and services indispensable , such as regular updates for both hardware and software in order to correct discovered flaws. While many flaws can be corrected, some attacks also make use of some specific system processing (regarding for example memory) that are mandatory for system functioning and that cannot be modified.

1.2. Active and passive attacks
Cyberattacks, while being specific to the type of system they are targeting, can be divided in two types : *active and passive attacks* .

1.2.1.	 Passive attacks
A passive attack designates an attack performed using only passive tools, i.e tools that do not tamper with the usual functioning of the targeted system [2]. Such passive attack can allow the attacker to steal or gain unauthorized access to the asset without extensive action. In such a situation, the attacker is only an observer. One of the main forms of passive attacks is Traffic Analysis, analysis of pieces of data exchanged on the network. It should be noted that communication encryption is a necessity in our current world. Another one would be keylogging, when the attacker recovers the keyboard inputs of a target in order to get relevant information such as passwords.
Passive attacks can also be a prelude to a following active one, the attacker taking advantage of the first phase to passively acquire data on the targeted system or individual.

1.2.2.	Active attacks
Active attacks, as opposed to passive ones, will tamper with the targeted system [3]. This type of attack may weaken the integrity of the targeted asset, but such fact can be an advantage if the attacker's objective is to destroy, damage or make inaccessible the targeted asset. With this type of attack, the victim may become aware of the attack by noticing some modified or lost data, or an unusual behavior of the system.

1.3.	Steps of an attack process : Kill Chain
Each cyberattack, either passive or active, either and inside or an outside one, follows a certain chain of events that only has small variations [4] : The Kill Chain.
The kill chain is divided in phases which describe the parts of the attack process.

1.3.1. Reconnaissance
The objective of this phase is to identify, learn and collect relevant data about the target. Multiple means can be used to achieve this first phase : social networks, online activity, technological and/or personal environment.

1.3.2.	Weaponization
After acquiring the needed data to conduct the attack comes the development phase of the attack tools : the weapon. All relevant tools are created and settled up during this phase, including the needed pieces of software (viruses, trojans, malicious files, etc) related to the entry point chosen.

1.3.3.	Delivery
The weapon is in this phase transmitted to the target, whether via files, emails, websites or trapped usb keys. At the end of this phase, the weapon can act on the targeted system.

1.3.4.	Exploitation
During this critical phase, the weapon tries to exploit the chosen flaw and/or means of entry in order to access the target in the desired way. It either exploits a technological flaw or a human one. It is to be noted that if this phase fails, so does the overall attack.

1.3.5.	Installation
Once access is obtained, the weapon will establish means to keep access to the target system.

1.3.6.	C2-Command & Control
Once access is established and secured, the weapon will establish, through different means, "hands on keyboard access" to the remote attacker, in order for the latter to be able to finish the attack process.

1.3.7.	Actions & Objectives
As all the six previous steps are completed, the attacker now has access to the asset within the targeted system and can perform the desired action with it : exfiltration, destruction, or another attack using the now controlled system. 


2.	Attackers

2.1.	Black, grey and white hats
At first the term hacker designated an expert in computer sciences or a skilled computer programmer. For example Linus Torvald (the creator of Linux) can be considered, by some, as a hacker. 
It now refers more to what is called a security hacker. Those ones use known or unreleased bugs and exploits to break into computer systems and access what is supposed to be private or restricted. That word includes experts but also 'script kiddies', these are people that use known online malwares or exploits tools without knowing how they work. [11], [12]
We will here describe three types of expert hackers : black, white and grey.
Black hats are a part of the mainstream representation of the word 'hacker' also known as 'crackers', they are criminals that use their knowledge in order to get information or get access to a computer system for illegal purposes.[6], [12]
Grey hats are people between black and white hats. Their behavior is difficult to determine as they are not only malicious people: they can either fix and or exploit a security breach. The main difference between grey and black hats is that a grey hat will not use an exploit to make profits. They mainly hack for fun or for 'troll' (which means making fun of or discrediting someone). [6], [12]
White hats are professional hackers that aim to keep data and computer systems  safe from other hackers. They are hired by companies that want to protect their system (often insurance companies, banks or the government). [6], [12]

2.2.	Goals for attackers
There are multiple reasons why black hats are hacking. The most common is personal accumulation of wealth. Money is often related to data, as a hacker is able to get access to restricted areas in a system, they can also access and get private data and sell it. Thus they can steal financial, credential or login information. [11], [12]
The target can be a normal person or a company depending on the hacker's abilities. There are also cases of spied companies: the hacker gets information from a company and sells it to its rival.
The second goal of a hacker is to make someone lose money without earning direct benefits for himself, by attacking a company or a big website, disabling their website or data servers. An attacked company can lose millions of dollars because of a server or website down. For example in 2016 the DNS Dyn was attacked with a DDOS attack which disabled it for a day: the loss is estimated at 110 millions dollars. [6], [8]

2.3.	Famous attackers

2.3.1.	Black hats
As explained before, hackers can be groups or individuals. Although we often think they are shy guys coding alone in their garage, there are some very popular groups of hackers such as 'Anonymous', 'GlobalHell', 'Bureau 121', 'Lizard squad', 'Lulzsec'.
One of the most famous former black hats is Kevin Mitnick.He is now an information technology consultant at Mitnick security consulting to advise on cybersecurity. [7]
Another famous black hat is Evgeniy Mikhailovich Bogachev, the author of the ransomware Gameover ZeuS. The FBI set a bounty of 3 millions dollars for whoever helped to arrest him. [9]

2.3.2.	White hats
On the opposing side, there are also some well-known names in white hats.
Dan Kaminski is the most famous white hat hacker: he found a big breach in DNS protocol
Also, Charlie Miller has been able to break into a remotely controlled car's system and control it entirely. His discovery led to the recall of 1.4 million cars. [15]
One should also note the name of Tsutomu Shimomura who helped the FBI to catch Kevin Mitnick. [15]

3.	Context of some major attacks

3.1.	Most used attacks

3.1.1.	 	DoS and DDoS
The DoS (Denial of Service) attack takes advantage of the limited capacity of the network or server. The goal for the attacker is to overload the server or channel to slow down or to render a service unavailable. Thus, the attacker sends a huge number of requests that the server cannot handle, or increase the number of packets in the channel to saturate it and render the server unreachable. Targets can be any entity with an online activity. [18], [19] A DDoS (Distributed Denial of Service) attack is based on the same principle, but here the attacker uses a network of "zombie machines", i.e. an arsenal of infected machines that he remotely controls to multiply the number of requests. This type of attack is constantly increasing, with millions of attempts every day worldwide, with volumes of hundreds of gigabits/second and rates of tens of millions of packets/second sent to the target. Nowadays, it is even easier to carry out these attacks because of online ready-to-use tools called booter or stresser. [20]

3.1.2.	Man-in-the-middle
This hacking technique consists in intercepting communications between two individuals without them being aware that they are being spied on. This is a very effective attack for example for key exchanges without authentication. Once infiltrated into the network, the attacker can carry out passive or active attacks: he can read but also modify communications. [18], [19] The most commonly used attacks in this family of attacks are ARP Spoofing (the attacker pretends to be a router), DNS Poisoning (the attacker tampers with the DNS server to redirect communications to it) or network traffic analysis via a sniffer. [22]
These techniques will be discussed in more detail in Chapter 2. 

3.1.3.	Phishing & Spear Phishing
Phishing attacks use communication tools to spread links of malicious documents at large-scale. The attacker is hoping that the victims will fill out the fake form to recover their personal or login data, or that they will download an infected attachment. The Spear Phishing approach is similar but the attack is extremely targeted and aims at a specific person. Here, the attacker investigated his victim through social engineering (via web research, Linkedin, Facebook, etc. ). to usurp the identity of someone the target knows. [18], [19], [23] Usually this is an immediate superior or a service the person subscribes. The message often mentions very short deadlines or serious consequences if this is not done quickly, urging the victim to act immediately. [24]

3.1.4.	SQL Injection
SQL queries are used to manipulate and query a database to fetch information. A SQL injection attack consists of inserting malicious SQL queries into a web application to access or destroy data in the database. The most common way is to fill out a login form by providing an SQL condition that is always checked. [26], [27], [28]

3.2.	Famous and historic attacks

3.2.1.	Project Rivolta: Mafia Boy
Michael Calce, nicknamed Mafia Boy, was 15 years old when he carried out a DDoS attack in February 2000 and blocked the entire Internet. He has thus rendered  the leading search engine Yahoo! (in these times) unavailable for an hour and also Amazon, CNN and Ebay. The teenager had just modified a script found online by adding the IP addresses of the sites he was targeting and created an arsenal of 200 zombie machines from an university network. The losses are estimated to be in billions of dollars. [30]

3.2.2.	Heartland Case: SQL Injection and Man-In-the-Middle attack
Heartland Payment Systems is a company managing online banking and payment transactions. During 2008, the hacker Albert Gonzalez, with the help of two Russian accomplices, infiltrated the network of Heartland and other financial services companies thanks to SQL injections. Once in the network, the attackers set up sniffers to detect and steal banking data circulating on the network. The group of hackers thus recovered more than 130 million bank numbers just from Heatland, before reselling them. [30],[32]

3.2.3.	Stuxnet
Stuxnet is a malware discovered in 2010 jointly designed by the United States and Israel to slow down the Iranian nuclear program. It was estimated that its development began between 2005 and 2006. Stuxnet exploited 4 new vulnerabilities on the Windows operating system, also called "0-day" vulnerabilities. The worm was designed to replicate itself and infect all the machines in the network. He then tries to detect whether software developed by Siemens controlling centrifuges for uranium enrichment was installed on the infected machine. In this case, the malware installs a rootkit in the machine's operating system to change the software's settings in order to destroy the centrifuges and thus slow down enrichment. It is estimated that this malware has destroyed about 1000 over 5000 centrifuges. The worm then spread to many countries but some removal tools were provided, including one from Siemens. [34],[35]
